The account from which the words of today's scripture text is drawn
really are the scriptural introduction to these two women
Mary and Martha
What do we know about them?
Well, they were siblings and they were both women of faith disciples of Christ and
and each had a unique
personality and outlook. That's not unusual in families, is it?
Now we can imagine their excitement in the late summer or early autumn of the year 32 CE as they prepared their home for a very
special guest
Jesus the Son of God. Can you imagine what it would be to have Jesus visit your home?
Well, when Jesus arrived
Martha was busy with preparation, but Mary chose to sit at Jesus' feet and
the account tells us that she kept listening and
Martha was a product of her upbringing. In first century Jewish life,
women were taught to care for domestic duties.
So her frustration with her sister reached a breaking point, didn't it?
And we can read about it in Luke chapter 10. Turn there with me, please.
To Luke chapter 10 and beginning in verse 40,
we read that Martha on the other hand was distracted
with attending to many duties.
So she came to Jesus and said, Lord, does it not matter to you that my sister has left me alone to attend to things?
Tell her to gut up and come help me. I
think I've heard my sisters say that to me in our childhood days.
Get up and come help me.
It's a very typical of siblings, isn't it? Well, there was a problem,
but was Mary the problem.
Well, the scripture indicates that Martha was distracted.
So she was probably surprised when rather than correcting
Mary, Jesus said in verse 41, Martha,
Martha, you were anxious and disturbed about many things. A
gentle
readjusting in verse 42, a few things though are needed or just one.
So Martha needed to adjust her thinking she was distracted and then rather than correct
Mary, what did Jesus do? He commended her, didn't it? Now that was noteworthy too because in
first century Jewish life, women were not encouraged to pursue academic studies.
For a woman to sit at the feet of a rabbi for the purpose of taking an instruction was very unusual,
but Jesus was not offended by it. In fact, he commended Mary. She chose the good portion or
the footnote on the verse tells us she chose the best portion.
Was Martha offended by the council? Well, just a few months later,
we meet Mary and Martha again in the Bible account in John chapter 11.
And on this occasion, very sadly, their brother Lazarus had died.
But Martha was the first to greet Jesus when he entered Bethany and what followed was a deep
spiritual discussion that reveals Martha's faith. Not only did she express faith in the resurrection,
but she had this to say about Jesus if we look at John chapter 11 and verse 27.
She said to him, yes, Lord, I have believed that you are the Christ, the Son of God, the one coming
into the world. Martha was a woman of faith. In verse 32, we find the only words in the Bible
attributed to Mary. Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died.
Well, both women were disciples of Christ, women of faith. Our last glimpse comes just six days
before Jesus died. He had opportunity one more time to enjoy sweet fellowship with this family
who we loved so much. In the home of Simon the leper, Jesus, Mary, Martha, Lazarus,
who had been resurrected. And Jesus apostles gathered for a meal. Can you imagine what that
must have been like? Now, in chapter 12 of John, verse 2, we read that they spread an evening meal
for Jesus. And Martha was serving them. So here's her hospitable spirit coming to the fore.
And Jesus didn't criticize her for that. Mary enters the scene in verse 3. She poured profumed oil
on Jesus' head. Subsequent verses tell us that the oil would have been worth about a year's
wage for the common wage earner in that time. Where did Mary get that oil? The Bible doesn't say,
but the point is she gave her best. Rather than being focused on food, she was focused on Jesus.
And just as she had been criticized earlier, she's criticized again, but not by Martha.
On this occasion, Judas takes the lead. The apparel accounts in Matthew and Mark tell us that
the other apostles joined in. What seemed to be a valid objection, the oil could have been sold
and given to the poor. But again, Jesus comes to Mary's defense, verse 7, let her alone.
What lessons can we learn from these two women? Here are three.
1. Spiritual people can make different choices. They have different strengths. Isn't it true
two siblings can grow up in the same spiritual home and on reaching adulthood, one may feel the
need to marry and have children and may do a beautiful job of bringing up children in the way of
Jehovah. While the other, even from a young age, may be focused on the full-time ministry,
and that's the goal. And in pursuing that goal, the sibling may decide to forego having a family,
may decide not to marry in order to serve Jehovah undistracted. Question is one more spiritual than
the other, not necessarily. Jesus didn't counsel Martha because she was hospitable. He counseled Martha
because she was distracted. In his life story, Stanley Jones, who spent seven years in solitary
confinement in a Chinese prison, speaks of a time when he became distracted. He was able to get
hold of some textbooks, and he began to read those textbooks, and he enjoyed them very much,
but he says, then I realized I was neglecting my Bible reading.
Now, if it's possible for an imprisoned missionary to become distracted, we would be fooling ourselves
to think we couldn't. Could a Christian parent become distracted? Could a pioneer become
distracted? Could a Bethelite become distracted? Secular pursuits, a career, education,
problems, hobbies? Any of those could distract us so that we neglect spiritual priorities.
And that's the lesson. Each day, we need to demonstrate that we're choosing the good portion.
The second lesson, those around you may not always understand the reason for your choices.
Think about it. Mary was criticized first by her sister and then by responsible brothers
for her choices. And something similar could happen today. We may have relatives or
brothers or sisters who don't understand why we sacrifice our resources, our energy, our time
to pursue the goals that we pursue. When that happens, don't be disheartened. Remember,
you're not the first. Mary knew what it was like, and remember Jesus understood and appreciated.
Finally, lesson number three, like Jesus, be quick to commend those around you who have
demonstrated that they're choosing the good portion. In our congregation, we have youngsters
and older ones as well. Right here in our work environment, we're surrounded by individuals
who have chosen the good portion, commend them, express appreciation, and in reflecting that
appreciative attitude of Jehovah and Jesus, you will strengthen your own resolve to go on choosing
the good portion.